NARRATOR: Humans...
Without a doubt, the
smartest animal on earth.
Yet we're unmistakably
tied to our ape origins.
Millions of years ago,
we were apes, living
ape lives in Africa.
So how did we get from that...
to this?
What happened?
What set us on the
path to humanity?
The questions are huge.
But at last,
there are answers.
More than six million years
ago we took that first step
to separate from the apes.
DON JOHANSON: We see the
launching of the career
that ultimately led
to Homo sapiens.
NARRATOR: And three
million years ago, we see
the roots of our big brain
begin to take hold
in a tiny creature
more like a chimp than a human.
PETER deMENOCAL: The
frontier of human evolution
is really being brought
to this razor sharp edge.
NARRATOR: And we now know
that for millions of years,
many different humanlike
species lived together
on the planet until one
day there was only us,
Homo sapiens,
the most complex,
adaptable animal on earth.
So how did we get
this way, and why?
A radical new theory reveals how
episodes of cataclysmic change
forced our ancestors
to adapt or die.
MARK MASLIN: I think
we should actually look
to our proud ancestry
and how we evolved in
East Africa and say,
That's how we survived that.
We can survive the future.
NARRATOR: So get ready for a
ride through millions of years
of our history.
Its the story of becoming
human-- our story--
right now, on NOVA.
Major funding for NOVA is
provided by the following:
ExxonMobil,
taking on the worlds
toughest energy challenges.
And by:
And...
And by the Corporation
for Public Broadcasting
and by contributions to
your PBS station from:
NARRATOR: Millions of years
ago, on the plains of Africa,
a momentous event took place.
Apes that had walked on four
legs stood up and walked on two.
Eventually, this
change in posture
would be followed by a
change in their brains.
Somehow, over time,
they would become us.
We know it happened, but we've
never known when or why.
Until now.
In the Sahara desert, a
six-million-year-old fossil
called Toumai may
hold the secret
of how we first walked upright.
(translated): We are
writing the first chapter
of human evolution.
We are very close
to the beginning.
Very close.
NARRATOR: And the
fossilized bones of a child
from three-and-a-half
million years ago,
hint to us about the
beginnings of human thought.
Were discovering how many
different human species
lived on earth at the same time
and why all but one died out.
We, Homo sapiens, are the
first ever to be alone.
So what powered our evolution?
Why did we become human?
Scientists are scouring the
most remote parts of Africa
for clues.
The search for answers
begins here, in the Afar--
northeastern Ethiopia.
Its part of the Great Rift
Valley, a deep cut in the earth
where geologic forces are
ripping Africa apart.
Millions of years of history
are brought to the surface
in layers of exposed rock.
Its hot and desolate.
Dangerous, too.
Ancient rivalries and modern
weapons have turned the Afar
into a no-mans-land
of simmering conflict.
But Zeray Alemseged has
made this forbidding place
his life's work.
Hes searching for
the fossilized traces
of our earliest human ancestors.
The fossil bones of animals
like antelopes, elephants
and pigs are abundant.
But the fossils of our
ancestors are extremely rare.
Then, in a stroke of
luck, Zeray makes the
find of a lifetime,
a find that illuminates our
origins in a unique way.
ALEMSEGED: On that
afternoon, we decided
to survey this hillside
and the first thing that
was spotted was a cheekbone
of the face.
NARRATOR: It was a face so
tiny it had to be a baby.
But not a baby chimp; he could
tell that from its shape.
The skull was
embedded in sandstone,
but as Zeray turned it over, he
could see more bones inside.
ALEMSEGED: Everything
was squashed
against the base of the skull
and completely covered
by the sandstone block.
NARRATOR: Clues to
the age of the fossil
came from a distinctive
feature in the landscape--
white bands of volcanic ash.
That is volcanic ash, dated
to 3.4 million years ago.
NARRATOR: If the volcanic ash
is 3.4 million years old,
Zerays fossil, which
was lying just above it,
must be younger.
It was a child from the
dawn of human evolution,
about 3.3 million years ago.
Zeray called the baby Selam,
the Ethiopian word for peace.
Then he set off on a quest to
unravel her many mysteries.
Her journey began a
very, very long time ago.
Imagine the entire span
of recorded human history
taking us back to the
Egyptian pyramids,
about 5,000 years.
Double it-- 10,000 years ago--
when plants were domesticated
and agriculture begins.
Double it again, to the
time when Ice Age hunters
paint stunning
images on cave walls.
And keep doubling
six more times,
taking us back
1.3 million years,
when the first creature
who really looked like us
hunted on the plains of Africa
and then keep traveling back
another two million years
and only then do we arrive
in the time when Selam lived
in Ethiopia nearly three-
and-a-half million years ago.
What were Selam and
her family like?
What kind of world
did they live in?
The answers are hidden
in their fossil bones.
Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
Zeray's home.
He is one of a whole new
generation of African scientists
trying to unravel the
mysteries of human origins.
Zeray has brought his
precious fossil here
to the National Museum.
His challenge is to release
her from the tomb of sandstone
in which her bones are encased.
He quickly identifies her.
She is from a species
considered by most scientists
to be an ancient ancestor.
Australopithecus afarensis.
A small, chimplike creature
who walked on two legs.
This is the same species
as the famous Lucy
discovered in the
1970s by Don Johanson.
JOHANSON: Lucy was terribly
important because she was really
an amalgam of different
characteristics
of ape and human.
ALEMSEGED: I think specimens
like Selam and Lucy are
extraordinary simply because
you can look at them and see
evolution in the making.
NARRATOR: But seeing
evolution in the making
will take some work.
Selam's fossilized
bones are solid rock
held together by a
mesh of soft sandstone.
It has to be
painstakingly removed.
ALEMSEGED: We spent
hours, hours and hours and
days and years and years
and I removed the sand
grains, grain by grain,
working every day.
NARRATOR: Hes been at
it for eight long years,
but the payoff has been amazing.
As the work progressed,
Zeray revealed an almost
complete skull...
and tucked beneath it was
nearly her entire spine,
along with both shoulder blades.
Other bones were found nearby.
ALEMSEGED: An almost
complete foot.
This is the kneecap.
The tibia here.
NARRATOR: Never before had a
childs skeleton been found
so ancient and so complete.
Her bones would
fit in a shoebox,
but they speak volumes
about her life.
For example, to find out how
old she was when she died,
Zeray looked at her teeth.
But not the baby teeth
visible in her jaw...
the adult teeth growing inside
the bone as seen in a CT scan.
From that, we know
Selam died at age three.
Like Lucy, she testifies to a
crucial step in our evolution.
Unlike apes, these
creatures walked upright,
as the first fossil Don Johanson
found clearly revealed.
JOHANSON: It was sticking
out of the ground like that.
And I gently tapped
it with my sneaker
and this is what fell
out of the ground.
And it is the... this is your...
the top end of your shinbone.
So the kneecap would
sit right in here.
And very close by in two
pieces I found this bone.
And when you put them together
and you see how they
move and articulate,
it has all the hallmarks
of an upright person.
NARRATOR: Other bones
confirm that Lucy walked
on two legs like us.
JOHANSON: This is Lucy's pelvis.
And you can see how
different a chimpanzee is.
And the reorientation
of these hip bones--
in a chimp theyre facing
straight forward.
So here is... this is what
everybody is sitting on
in their living room right now.
So theyre not identical,
but clearly these two
resemble each other
much more closely, right,
than either one of these
resembles the pelvis of an ape.
NARRATOR: From the waist
down, Lucy was like us.
From the waist up, she
and her kind were all ape.
Selams skeleton is the same,
with chimplike shoulder blades
giving her the range of motion
needed for climbing
and swinging.
These ancient creatures must
have spent time in the trees,
possibly sleeping
there at night to keep
away from predators,
but walking upright on the
ground during the day.
They were at home in two worlds.
What was their environment like?
It must have been very different
from the Great Rift
Valley of today.
Across the border in Kenya
is one of the hottest and
most barren places on earth,
a vast expanse of volcanic
rock and burning desert.
Thats how it is now.
But theres good evidence
that for most of its history
it was very different.
Researchers braving
temperatures over 100 degrees
are seeing signs of a
dramatic transformation
here in the Suguta Valley.
YANNICK GARDIN: The
Suguta Valley was entirely
covered in water,
up to an elevation
of about 580 meters.
So you can imagine
that all this valley
was filled by a huge lake.
NARRATOR: A huge lake
thats deeper than any
of the Great Lakes.
In fact, the entire African
continent used to be
a lot wetter than it is today.
Many millions of years ago,
long before Selam and Lucy,
Africa was a wet,
tropical environment
covered with rainforest.
This is where the ancestors
of Selam and Lucy lived.
They probably looked
a lot like chimps.
But then, Africa started
to gradually dry out.
The rainforest began to shrink.
By Selams time, three to
four million years ago,
the Great Rift
Valley was a mosaic
of different environments.
We know that from the fossils
of the animals that lived here.
Their bones litter the ground.
This is a canine
of a hippopotamus,
so this is probably the
skeleton of a hippopotamus.
How can one find a hippo in
this type of environment?
Nice antelope here.
NARRATOR: The fossils tell the
story of a vanished landscape.
ALEMSEGED: This is the
lower jaw of an antelope.
NARRATOR: Three million
years ago, the Rift
Valley was a patchwork
of grassy plains, scattered
woodlands, lakes and rivers.
Definitely very different
from what we see here today.
Wow, a nice pig here.
NARRATOR: As their
environment changed,
scientists believe our
ancestors changed, too.
They had been creatures
who spent most of
their time in trees,
like chimps and
orangutans today.
But as their forests
shrank, some of them
developed the trait
that we take for granted:
bipedalism--
walking on two legs.
This is one of the defining
characteristics of humans.
But how did bipedalism
develop, and why?
BRIAN RICHMOND: Bipedalism
is such an unusual trait.
Theres no other mammal
that habitually walks
on two legs like we do.
NARRATOR: Because it's
unique, it's hard to figure
out why it happened.
There are a lot of theories.
RICHMOND: One of them
is that they stood up
to be able to see
over tall grass.
Another theory-- they stood
up to be able to pick fruits
off of the low branches of trees
the way chimpanzees do today.
Another theory states
that they stood up to
cool more efficiently,
so that we dont have
as much sun beating on
so much of our body.
DANIEL LIEBERMAN: I think
the most compelling idea,
the most compelling hypothesis,
is that it saved us energy.
NARRATOR: And energy
is crucial to survival.
Lets go back to
the dense forest,
home to our ancient ape
ancestors ten million years ago.
Like many apes today,
they were perfectly suited
to a life in the trees.
LIEBERMAN: They're very
good at climbing in trees.
They're phenomenal
at climbing in trees.
NARRATOR: On the ground,
these ancestral apes could
probably walk on two legs
for short distances if they
had to carry something.
LIEBERMAN: Fantastic climbers,
but also able to walk and run
rapidly and effectively
but not economically.
NARRATOR: Walking was
tiring, but they didnt
have to walk far.
LIEBERMAN: But if youre
a chimp and you only walk
two to three kilometers a day,
it doesnt really mean much,
its not going to have
that much of an effect
on your energy budget.
NARRATOR: But energy
demands would change
as the forest
started to disappear.
Our ape ancestors
had to walk more.
LIEBERMAN: They
have to go farther
to get from one fruit patch
to another fruit
patch, for example.
NARRATOR: Dan Lieberman is
an expert on bipedalism.
He believes that walking
on two legs evolved
because it saved energy.
When you compare the
energy consumption
of humans to chimps,
there's no contest.
A chimp is an energy glutton.
It spends an enormous
amount of energy--
about four times as much
energy as a human walking.
NARRATOR: Whether it
walks on four legs...
or two...
a chimp can't compete
with the human gait.
LIEBERMAN: Its poorly
designed to withstand
the forces of gravity.
It has to spend a lot of
muscular effort to keep itself
from collapsing
into a little pile of
chimpness or whatever
with each step.
NARRATOR: According
to Lieberman, small
anatomical differences
created large energy savings,
setting our ancestors on
the path to bipedalism,
a path that would
eventually lead to us.
But first discovered,ake?
When Lucys kind were
many people thought they were
the so-called missing link
between apes and humans.
But the science of genetics has
transformed our understanding
with a technique called
the molecular clock.
Today, scientists
can compare DNA from
closely related species
to find out how long ago they
split from a common ancestor.
MARK STONEKING: Its
just a very simple idea
that the rate of
change in DNA sequences
is more or less
constant over time.
And thats an extraordinarily
powerful concept
because it means that you
have a way of determining
when two species last
shared a common ancestor.
NARRATOR: Living forms
evolve because DNA sometimes
spontaneously changes
as it copies itself.
These changes happen at a
surprisingly regular rate.
By counting the differences
between the genetic code
of chimps and humans,
we can calculate
how long theyve been evolving
away from each other.
The dates that one almost
always gets are around
five to seven million years ago
for when humans and chimpanzees
last shared a common ancestor.
NARRATOR: Here was proof that
humans diverged from the apes
much earlier than we thought,
about six million years ago.
It shows Lucy and Selam werent
one step removed from chimps
but many.
They may even be closer to us
than to the first
human ancestor.
So what came before
Lucy and Selam?
Who was our earliest ancestor?
Until the 1990s, the
fossil record was blank.
Fossil hunters combed East
Africas Great Rift Valley
but could only find
small fragments
older than four million years.
Then, in 1997, a
French anthropologist
called Michel Brunet decided
to look somewhere else.
(Brunet speaking French)
(translated): We decided to go
to Africa, but to the west,
to the west of the Great Rift.
NARRATOR: 1,600 miles
to the west at the edge
of the Sahara desert
in northern Chad.
BRUNET (translated):
Obviously, if you only go to
the field in East Africa,
then you are going to find
fossils only in East Africa.
This was the situation.
(gusty winds blow)
NARRATOR: Michel was
looking in a place where
the few animal fossils
he turned up were all around
six million years old.
No one expected any humanlike
fossils to be found
in a layer that ancient.
(translated): And
everyone said,
No. There just aren't
any fossils there.
NARRATOR: Michel was
not to be deterred.
He was stubborn, many thought
to the point of madness.
He and his team spent
years searching the desert
for signs of our ancestors.
And year after year,
they came up empty.
Then, on their 26th
expedition, in 2001,
they found a smashed,
misshapen skull...
around six million years old.
They called it
Sahelanthropus tchadensis.
There were no bones
apart from the skull.
Could it be a human ancestor?
Or just another ape?
The skull was so deformed
it was difficult to tell.
Michel would have
to reconstruct it.
His first step was
to take the skull,
now nicknamed Toumai, to
a particle accelerator
in Grenoble, France, to use
its powerful X-ray scanner.
Over a thousand pictures
of the fossil were taken
to build a 3-D image
of the crushed skull.
Using the virtual image,
the skull could be restored
to its original shape.
It was then reproduced
by a type of 3-D printer
equipped with lasers
which harden plastic.
When it finally
rose from its bath,
the cast of Toumais skull was
ready for detailed study.
The cast allows Michel to
answer an important question.
Did this ancient
creature walk on two legs
millions of years
before Lucy or Selam?
Its how the skull
connects to the spine
that provides the vital clue.
And Michel could infer that from
the shape of Toumai's skull.
If Toumais skull is set
on the neck of an ape
that walks on all fours,
his eyes point downward.
That can't be right.
Set on the upright
spine of a biped,
his eyes point straight ahead.
For Michel, this proved
Toumai walked upright.
(translated):
Anatomically speaking,
he had the receding
back skull of a biped.
The back of his skull is
not that of a gorilla,
like some people
are trying to say.
No, not at all.
All you have to do is look.
NARRATOR: Some
scientists still question
whether Toumai was
really a biped.
But if Michel is right, his
six-million-year-old fossil
is a good candidate for
the first human ancestor.
Discoveries like this
are changing the way
we see human evolution.
Scientists used to
have a simple idea:
the growth of open grasslands
forced our ancestors
out of the trees.
They became bipeds,
and in short order,
brain size increased.
Human evolution took off.
We were on our way
to becoming human.
That simple idea prevailed
for more than a century.
JOHANSON: Darwin thought
that we left the trees,
walked on the ground upright,
freed our hands, made
tools, got big brains,
reduced our canines and so on
all at the same time.
NARRATOR: But walking upright
may not have automatically led
to big brains at all.
From Toumai to Selam, both
bipeds, brains stayed small.
And they weren't the only ones.
Over millions of years there was
a profusion of upright walkers
with complicated names
and chimp-sized brains...
Like Orrorin tugenensis.
LIEBERMAN: What were seeing
is a florescence of species,
multiple species.
They're probably subtly
different from each other.
NARRATOR: Ardipithecus ramidus.
LIEBERMAN: But its
important to recognize
that there are not major
differences among these species.
NARRATOR: Australopithecus
africanus.
LIEBERMAN: They were
all bipeds, big snouts,
more or less chimp-sized brains.
NARRATOR: Kenyanthropus
platyops.
This way of life, this
suite of adaptations,
lasted for millions of years.
NARRATOR: Small-brained bipedal
apes were extremely successful.
Debates rage among scientists
about which one
eventually led to us.
But as a group, they flourished
for about 25 times longer
than we've been around.
They survived and thrived
as brain size flat-lined for
almost four million years.
But that doesnt mean
nothing changed.
Theres evidence that the seeds
of our humanity were growing
in these apelike creatures.
One key difference
between humans and apes
is the length of childhood.
But what do we know
about the childhood
of our early ancestors?
ALEMSEGED: We knew all about
the adult individuals,
but we didn't know much
about the children.
NARRATOR: The brains
of baby chimps have
an early growth spurt.
Theyre almost fully
formed by age three.
In humans that growth
spurt is slower,
and it takes nearly two decades
for our brains to fully mature.
But what about Selam's brain,
3.3 million years ago?
Her skull tells us
all we need to know.
We have her milk teeth
and her adult teeth,
which give us her
age-- three years old.
And we have a cast of
the inside of her skull,
which tells us about her brain.
When you have this you
can directly measure
how much of the brain
was formed at age three.
NARRATOR: From other
fossils, we know how large
Selam's brain would
have been as an adult.
So Zeray could calculate
how much of her brain
was already formed by age
three, when she died.
He knows what the answer
would be for a chimp.
ALEMSEGED: By age three,
a chimpanzee would have
over 90% of the brain formed.
NARRATOR: But Selams
brain was only around
75% of its adult size,
suggesting it was
growing up slower.
(squeaking)
NARRATOR: Childhood would
have been her time to learn,
to learn the survival strategies
her family group needed
to live in a dangerous world.
Perhaps this set the stage for
our longer human childhood,
when culture is handed down.
But is there any other evidence
Selams brain was becoming
more human and less ape?
To find out, compare a
human brain to a chimp's.
TODD PREUSS: This is the brain
of our closest relative,
the chimpanzee brain.
Its slightly larger
than you would expect
of a typical primate
for their body size.
Not greatly so.
NARRATOR: Scientists
look for clues to the
evolution of the brain
in the folds and
furrows on its surface.
One important structure is
called the lunate sulcus.
PREUSS: In chimpanzees
as in many primates,
there is this big, deep sulcus
here, the lunate sulcus.
NARRATOR: The lunate sulcus is a
deep furrow in a primates brain.
It divides parts of the
brain related to vision
from the rest of
the neocortex,
which is where more
complex thought happens.
The human brain doesnt
have this deep furrow,
and the neocortex is bigger
than the vision structures,
which have moved
far to the back.
So did Selam have the deep
furrow and small neocortex
of a chimp?
Or had something changed?
Brains dont fossilize, but
her remarkably complete skull
provides a way to see some
of the different structures
of her brain.
A cast of the brain case,
called an endocast,
preserves the impression
of the brain's surface.
Ralph Holloway has a collection
of 300 brain endocasts
from many of our ancestors.
HOLLOWAY: What
a paleoneurologist like
myself will be looking for
are those indications on the
endocast that might suggest
reorganization taking place.
And thats why things
like the so-called infamous
lunate sulcus becomes important.
NARRATOR: Ralph claims that as
chimplike ancestors evolved
into creatures like
Selam and Lucy,
the lunate sulcus, the furrow
marking the vision structures,
moved back, making room
for a larger neocortex,
the thinking part of the brain.
HOLLOWAY: If you
look carefully,
what youve got here
is a depression
that could very likely
be the lunate sulcus.
And so that suggests, then,
by australopithecine times,
that, you know, youre having a
beast that is simply smarter
than present-day chimpanzees.
NARRATOR: If thats the case,
although still the
size of a chimps,
Selam's brain had been rewired.
But there was a long way to go.
She and her kind were
still very apelike.
It would take
another million years
for the seeds of humanity
contained in Selams tiny frame
to bear fruit.
It's a time still
shrouded in mystery.
For almost half
a million years,
the fossil record
is virtually silent.
But in this blank period,
something is happening.
In 2.5 million-year-old
layers,
scientists begin to
find something new.
We might be tempted
to call them rocks,
but someone was shaping them.
They are the first stone tools.
RICHMOND: The way we know
this is a tool instead
of just a broken rock
is that its broken in
a very particular way,
breaking a flake off this
way, that way, this way,
back and forth.
So there is a method behind
how this rock was broken
in order to make
it into a tool,
and it's not a random method.
NARRATOR: Its
considered unlikely
they were made by
Australopithecus, Lucys kind.
RICHMOND: Australopithecus
was around
for a couple of million years
and did not make stone tools.
NARRATOR: But if not
Lucys kind, then who?
The gap in the fossil record
makes it difficult to say,
but that's not surprising.
Tools preserve easily,
bones much less so.
Finally, the skulls of a new
creature begin to turn up.
Is this the toolmaker?
The skulls are different
from what came before.
They represent the
dawn of a new era
beginning around two
million years ago.
This is our era, the era
of the genus Homo, humans.
The mysterious
toolmaker, Homo habilis,
is the first of
these new creatures.
RICHMOND: We definitely
have evidence
that the stone tools were being
used to break the long bones
in order to get to the marrow
inside the long bones.
There were clear cut marks
on the bones of turtles,
crocodiles, big antelopes,
little antelopes, even hippos--
really big animals like hippos.
So we know that meat had
become a new important part
of the diet of Homo habilis.
NARRATOR: The first fossil to
be called Homo habilis included
21 bones of the hand and was
nicknamed Handy Man.
RICHMOND: This little
bone is the bone at
the end of the thumb,
and that little bone in Homo
habilis, like in humans,
is very broad.
And the broad bone
reflects having a broad
pad on the thumb,
with a lot of surface area
for fine, precision grip.
NARRATOR: With newly
dexterous hands,
this creature could
make better tools.
But what was it like?
The few skeletal bones
that have been found
indicate a creature
much smaller than us,
about the same size as
Lucy and Selams kind--
Australopithecus--
three to four feet tall.
Homo habilis was still
apelike in many ways,
but with a critical difference.
RICHMOND: What we see in the
evolution of Homo habilis
is an expansion
in the brain size
compared to Australopithecus.
So here is the skull
of Australopithecus,
and it has no forehead,
it just has the straight
slope behind the orbits.
Whereas here in Homo habilis
you see a sloping,
elevated forehead.
And in Australopithecus,
the area behind the orbits
is pinched in, also reflecting
a small frontal region.
In contrast, in Homo habilis,
we see an expansion of
that area behind the orbits
that points to an expansion
in the cognitive capabilities
of higher functions,
of the higher reasoning
functions of the brain.
NARRATOR: It was an
expansion equivalent to a
doubling of brain volume.
HOLLOWAY: Once you
go from something
like 400 cc in
australopithecines
to, say, 700, 800 cc
in Homo habilis, yes,
you're getting a big increase
in cognitive capacity.
NARRATOR: And along
with his bigger brain,
Homo habilis was starting
to look a lot more human.
The contours of fossil skulls
allow reconstructionist
Viktor Deak
to reveal the faces
of early human beings.
Gone is the projecting
snout of an ape.
In Homo habilis, the face
of humanity is emerging.
This poses a great enigma.
Why, after millions of
years of flat-lining,
did brain size and mental
capacities suddenly take off?
Two million years ago, what
jump-started human evolution?
Scientists all over
Africa looked for clues.
Here in Kenya they found some,
at the southern end of
the Great Rift Valley.
Its a hotbed of
tectonic activity
where ancient layers are
forced to the surface.
Ten million years ago, Africa
was a much wetter place,
a tropical jungle which has been
slowly drying out ever since.
But these rocks in Kenya show
that Africas gradual drying
trend was punctuated
by bursts of wild
climate fluctuation.
Rick Potts is an expert
in reading the rocks.
POTTS: This layer right here
represents about 1,000 years
of environmental stability,
but then we had an abrupt
volcanic eruption,
and then the lake was
around for perhaps 500 years
before a drought, then
the lake came back.
So in some cases we saw this
through layer after layer
of environmental change.
NARRATOR: With his trained
eye, Rick could see
some layers were once lake
beds, others desert sands.
Still others came from
volcanic eruptions--
a snapshot of a million
years of climate history.
This observation led him
to an amazing new idea--
rapid change as a catalyst
for our evolution.
POTTS: And I began
to think that, well,
maybe its not the particular
environment of a savanna
that was important,
but the tendency of the
environment to change.
NARRATOR: Could it
be that the need
to survive violent
swings of climate
made our ancestors
more adaptable?
A group of scientists has come
here from Germany to find out
just how radical these swings
of climate really were.
Its hard to believe, but
these huge rock formations
are made of the shells of
tiny one-celled organisms
called diatoms.
There are many different kinds,
but they all live in water.
Their shells collect in
layers of rock that pile up
over millions of years,
proving that this whole
valley was once a giant lake.
Annett Junginger analyzes
these rock samples
under the microscope.
What Ive discovered was
that those white layers consist
of a special kind of diatoms
which only live in deep lakes.
NARRATOR: But between
the white layers
she also finds other
species of diatoms
which only live
in shallow water.
It means that in this spot,
a massive lake appeared
and disappeared and
reappeared many times.
JOHN KINGSTON: These lakes
are really significant;
these are not small ponds.
And what weve been
able to document now
is a series of lakes
that are cycling.
MASLIN: Were talking
freshwater lakes the
size of Lake Victoria,
filling the whole Rift Valley,
and then disappearing.
Enormous amount of water
rushing through this area.
This constant flux of
turnover, of change.
An awful time to live here.
It's not just a
unidirectional change.
It's going back and forth.
NARRATOR: Against the backdrop
of a slow drying trend,
Africa was periodically
pulsing with climate change:
wet, dry, then wet again,
sometimes in the
space of 1,000 years.
Punishing drought alternated
with storms and monsoons.
Rivers and forests sprang up,
then turned to dry grassland
all in the evolutionary
blink of an eye.
So we have a complete
change of our ideas,
from this slow drying out,
to this incredible change
between wet and
dry, wet and dry.
NARRATOR: What effect did
that have on our ancestors?
Could these periods of climate
instability be the key
to understanding the
evolutionary leap
from small bipedal apes
to the larger brained
toolmaker, Homo habilis?
To know that, scientists
needed a detailed record
that went back further
than the diatoms--
way back to the time when
Homo habilis was evolving
two million years ago.
That's only found in one
place-- under the ocean.
Layers of deep-sea
sediment tell a story
that goes back
millions of years.
They have to be drilled
from the ocean floor.
At his laboratory
in Upstate New York,
Peter deMenocal keeps
thousands of columns
of sand, silt and rock--
a library of ocean cores.
deMENOCAL: One of the
really attractive features
about ocean sediments
is that they accumulate very
slowly but very gradually
and continuously over time.
NARRATOR: Each three-foot long
core holds a continuous record
of dust carried on the wind
from Africa into the ocean,
where it now sits on the bottom.
Oh, nice! Wow! There we go!
Sweet-- okay.
NARRATOR: An expert eye can
detect distinct layers--
thick in dry years
when the dust is easily
picked up by the wind;
thin in wet years.
By measuring the layers,
they can tell when the
climate was wet or dry.
deMENOCAL: So we can read
these deep-sea sediments
almost like an earth history
book of past changes in climate.
NARRATOR: To make sense of all
this dirt, they have to know
when it blew into the ocean.
They can do this by dating the
shells of tiny sea creatures
that sank to the bottom
at the same time.
deMENOCAL: So this
gives us an age,
the other analysis
gives us the climate.
Oh, nice!
NARRATOR: Peter took this
finely detailed climate diary
and compared it to the grand
arc of our human evolution.
For the three million years
between Toumai and Selam,
when brain size was
flat-lining, African
climate was stable--
dry... getting a little drier.
Then came 200,000 years of
wildly varying climate,
careening unpredictably
between wet and dry.
During that time,
stone tools appeared
along with the larger brained
creatures that made them.
Africa was also home to many
other humanlike species.
Climate instability put
pressure on all of them.
So there are these time periods
when African climate
was really unstable,
so anything that was
living there at the time
would have had to adapt
to really dramatically
different climate changes.
NARRATOR: Those that
couldnt adapt died out,
like Selam and Lucys kind.
Better problem-solvers, like
Homo habilis, survived.
The new discoveries
about ancient climate
upheavals in Africa
have led Rick Potts to
formulate a bold theory
of human evolution.
POTTS: The traditional idea we
have had about human evolution
is that it was the
savanna-- the grassy plain
with some trees on it--
that was the driving force.
But instead, what
weve discovered
is that climate
changed all the time.
And so the idea that
weve come up with is
that variability itself
was the driving force
of human evolution
and that our ancestors were
adapted to change itself.
NARRATOR: Its a simple
but revolutionary idea--
human evolution is natures
experiment with versatility.
Were not adapted to any one
environment or climate,
but to many.
We are creatures
of climate change.
I think we should actually
look to our proud ancestry
and how we evolved in
East Africa and say,
That's how we survived that.
We can survive the future.
Because we are that creature,
because we are that smart.
NARRATOR: Today, climate change
seems to threaten our survival.
But it may have held the
keys to the astonishing story
of how we became who we are.
Because it didn't stop
two million years ago.
These dramatic
upheavals would continue
for another million
and a half years,
propelling our ancestors down
a road leading ultimately
to the smartest creature
the world has ever known.
NOVAs got a brand-new
evolution Web site
with lots to explore
about our ancestors.
We want to know what you think.
Bookmark it today and
give us your feedback.
Find it at pbs.org.
Major funding for NOVA is
provided by the following:
ExxonMobil,
taking on the worlds
toughest energy challenges.
And by:
And...
And by the Corporation
for Public Broadcasting
and by contributions to
your PBS station from:
Captioned by Media Access
Group at WGBH access.wgbh.org